Update DAP docs to reflect reality (#169)
DataBiosphere/dog-aging-ingest: README.md

side, we've been told by DAP leadership that the HLES structure is effectively immutable on their end,
so it's unlikely we'll ever need to rewrite large chunks of this processing logic.

## Additional Datasets

### CSLB Data
The Canine Social and Learned Behavior is a followup survey to HLES that is administered annually. 
The goal of this survey is to assess age-related cognitive and behavioral changes in dogs. The first 

> time a participant fills out the CSLB survey, a baseline score for  is established. Participants will 

Reviewer: ⛏️ Typo: 
```suggestion
time a participant fills out the CSLB survey, a baseline score is established. Participants will 
```

have the opportunity to complete the survey again every year. This repeated design allows us to learn 
how the dogs in the study change over time. Answers to all questions are required.

> #### CSLB Extraction

Reviewer: 🔧 This section seems to cover just the _criteria_ for extraction, what do you think about updating the title to reflect that?

* Pull all records from each yearly arm *"annual_{yyyy}_arm_1"*

> * _canine_social_and_learned_behavior_complete_ is marked as complete

Reviewer: 🤔 This doesn't quite parse for me. Is this supposed to be a predicate, i.e., 

```suggestion
where _canine_social_and_learned_behavior_complete_ is marked as complete
```

#### CSLB Schema Design
* A single `cslb` table which contains a single CSLB record per dog per year. 
* The table includes the 16 CSLB question responses and a foreign key to the dog table. 

## Environmental Data
Environmental Data in the Dog Aging Project is published monthly to RedCap for each dog using the addresses
collected in the HLES survey. It seeks to capture a snapshot of key environmental factors that may affect a 
dog's health over time so it can be used in conjunction with the other datasets. All fields from environmental 
data are calculated using the HLES primary and secondary addresses.

#### Environmental Extraction
* Pull all records from each monthly arm for each address: *"annual_{MMMyyyy}_arm_1"*, *"annual_{MMMyyyy}_secondary_arm_1* 

> * _baseline_complete_ is marked as complete

Reviewer: 🔧 Same comment about the predicate here

#### Environment Schema Design

> The Environmental data was pretty straightforward as DAP provided us with a proto-schema which we

Reviewer: 🔧 Avoid qualitative language  like "pretty straightforward" in more formal tech documentation like this. 

```suggestion
Environmental data is modeled closely on what the DAP provided us, with a proto-schema which we
```

converted to a repo schema. We decided to break the larger table up into smaller fragments: 
_geocoding, census, pollutants, temperature_precipitation, and walkability_ variables.

* A single `environment` table which contains a single Environment record per dog per month per address. 

> * The table includes 147 environmental variables and a foreign key to the dog table. 

Reviewer: ⛏️ I suggest avoiding the specific # of environmental variables here as that can get out of date quickly:
```suggestion
* The table includes all environmental variables and a foreign key to the dog table. 
```

* Rows in the final Environment table will be unique on _dog_id_ and _address_month_year_.

## Sample Data
Sample Data in the Dog Aging Project is populated as different cohorts of participants are sent different 
sample kits. Our extraction of this data seeks to capture the linkage between study_id (_dog_id_) and 
sample_id as well as some other metadata about the sample.

#### Sample Extraction

> * Pull all records from the baseline arm (*baseline_arm_1*) 

Reviewer: 🔧 Same question about the predicate wording here

* _k1_tube_serial_ and _k1_rtn_tracking_date_ must be populated

#### Sample Schema Design
* A single `sample` table which contains multiple samples per dog.
* Simple lookup table with 6 fields and a foreign key to the dog table.
* Rows in the final Environment table will be unique on _dog_id_ and _sample_id_.

## Label Mapping Table
We have a manually maintained lookup table that we are constructing using the Terra JSON schema for the DAP tables and 
the DAP data dictionaries provided from RedCap. The table contains a row for each field in the the final dog aging tables.
The mapping table includes fields to capture information about the upstream source of data, datatypes, and most importantly,
the mapping of raw values ot value labels for RedCap survey questions with *radio* responses.

We are looking forward to building some tooling that will be able to
parse a proto-schema provided by DAP into usable code for ingest in the form of a Terra JSON Schema output.

#### Creating Outfiles 
DAP's long term future would include an official TDR<->Workspace integration but we are currently still building that out.

> To give ourselves some breathing room, we've written a [script](./hack/convert-output-to-tsv.py) to convert

Reviewer: ⛏️ Another "qualitative language in tech docs" nit:
```suggestion
Until that integration is live, we've written a [script](./hack/convert-output-to-tsv.py) to convert
```

the outputs of our transformation pipeline into workspace-compatible TSVs. 
The script takes two positional arguments:
1. Path to the top-level directory containing the outputs of the transformation pipeline
2. Path to a directory where converted TSVs should be written
There are additional arguments to that script to add some flexibility to the tool:

> * Can take in a list of tables to process (currently looks for all tables)

Reviewer: ⛏️ I think "can take in a" is redundant when documenting args to a CLI tool:
```suggestion
* List of tables to process (currently looks for all tables)
* Whether to output primary keys with a modified column name for Firecloud compatibility: *entity:{table_name}_id*<br class="Apple-interchange-newline">
```

* Can output primary keys with a modified column name for Firecloud compatibility: *entity:{table_name}_id*
* Call Format:
    * `python convert-output-to-tsv.py {transform GS path} {tsv outfile local path} -d`

>     * `python convert-output-to-tsv.py gs://broad-dsp-monster/weekly_refresh/20210525/transform /Users/DATA/DAP/tsv -d`

Reviewer: ⛏️ I like to avoid including "real" infrastructural references if possible:
```suggestion
    * `python convert-output-to-tsv.py gs://example-bucket/weekly_refresh/20210525/transform /Users/DATA/DAP/tsv -d`
```

are now running our refreshes in *dev_mode* using the dataflow_beam runner.
The Dagster project we added for DAP includes 3 different modes of operation:
1. `local_mode` uses local_beam_runner
1. `dev_mode` uses dataflow_beam_runner
1. `prod_mode` uses dataflow_beam_runner

For now, we can call individual pipelines manually with any runner and then call the tsv script to write files locally.
The general structure for the SBT call to kick off one of our pipelines:
* `sbt "{scala_project} {target_class} {sbt parameters} {dataflow parameters}"`
* Here is sample an sbt for the Environment extraction pipeline:
    >sbt "dog-aging-hles-extraction/runMain org.broadinstitute.monster.dap.environment.EnvironmentExtractionPipeline 
    --apiToken=foo --pullDataDictionaries=false --outputPrefix=bar --runner=dataflow --project=baz --region=us-central1
    --workerMachineType=n1-standard-1 --autoscalingAlgorithm=THROUGHPUT_BASED --numWorkers=4 --maxNumWorkers=8 
    --experiments=shuffle_mode=service --endTime=qux"

Alternatively we can also execute a Dagster pipeline which will run all the pipelines and write local TSVs and will 
use a runner based on the mode.

### Manual Refresh (Dagster)

> 1. Navigate to the *orhcestration* subdirectory

Reviewer: ⛏️ typo:
```suggestion
1. Navigate to the *orchestration* subdirectory
```

> 2. Poetry installation

Reviewer: ⛏️ This isn't really installing poetry, but rather setting up the DAP venv. Perhaps:

```suggestion
2. Setup python virtual environment
```

Reviewer: I think it'd also be worth adding a note somewhere in this section to indicate that the dev should install poetry before getting started

    * `poetry install` to install your project’s package
    * `poetry update` to get the latest versions of the dependencies and to update the poetry.lock file
2. Update config entries in orchestration/dev_refresh.yaml:
    * Update the `refresh_directory` resource config entry (_this should be a GCS path_)
    * Update the `working_dir` config entry for the *write_outfiles* solid
    * Update the `end_time`, `pull_data_dictionaries`, and `api_token` config entries for each extract solid
3. Execute the pipeline:
    * `poetry shell` spawns a shell within the project's virtual environment
    * `dagster pipeline execute -f repositories.py -a repositories -p refresh_data_all --mode dev -c dev_refresh.yaml`
4. Files should appear within a "tsv_output" relative to the `working_dir` specified in the config.

### Data Delivery to DAP
When the hles_data volume was much smaller, we were able to load the final TSVs directly to Terra using the UI prompts.
Once the data grew too big to load via browser UI, we started utilizing the field engineering script to upload large entities. 

> While still building out the TDR - workspace integration for DAP, we are using a Google bucket to deliver refreshed TSVs.

Reviewer: ⛏️ I think we're using the "<->" notation for the integration above, so for consistency I suggest:
```suggestion
While still building out the TDR <-> workspace integration for DAP, we are using a Google bucket to deliver refreshed TSVs.
```

sample_id as well as some other metadata about the sample.

#### Sample Extraction Criteria
* Pull all records from the baseline arm (*baseline_arm_1*) 
* where _k1_tube_serial_ and _k1_rtn_tracking_date_ are populated.

#### Sample Schema Design
* A single `sample` table which contains multiple samples per dog.
* Simple lookup table with 6 fields and a foreign key to the dog table.
* Rows in the final Environment table will be unique on _dog_id_ and _sample_id_.

## Label Mapping Table
We have a manually maintained lookup table that we are constructing using the Terra JSON schema for the DAP tables and 
the DAP data dictionaries provided from RedCap. The table contains a row for each field in the the final dog aging tables.
The mapping table includes fields to capture information about the upstream source of data, datatypes, and most importantly,
the mapping of raw values ot value labels for RedCap survey questions with *radio* responses.

We are looking forward to building some tooling that will be able to
parse a proto-schema provided by DAP into usable code for ingest in the form of a Terra JSON Schema output.

#### Creating Outfiles 

> DAP's long term future would include an official TDR<->Workspace integration but we are currently still building that out.

Reviewer: One more nit: we are not in the process of building that out (sorry if I led you astray with a previous comment). To avoid any potential confusion let's say:
```suggestion
The DAP ingest's long term roadmap includes a TDR<->Workspace integration. Until that is integration is live...
```
